

                      INSTRUCTIONS FOR TOMUSUS.03


1.  GENERAL INFORMATION

TOMUSUS stands for "Terminal Option for MUSUS" and is pronounced "to 
muse us".  It is a modified version of Bob Peterson's TERMINAL program 
which utilizes REMUNIT, the standard communication UNIT adopted by 
USUS for all terminal communication programs in UCSD Pascal.

TOMUSUS.03 is an upgraded version of TOMUSUS.02, which was previously
made available for LSI-11 users of MUSUS.  TOMUSUS.03 is more
efficient for disk operations during transmission and also has the
following new features:

     a.  The B(reak option, which transmits the break signal to the
remote computer;

     b.  The X(off option, which transmits the XOFF (control-S) signal
to the remote computer;

     c.  O(ptions will now present a submenu.

It should be noted that REMUNIT.L3, which is used by TOMUSUS.03,
utilizes the two external procedures SET_BREAK and CLR_BREAK.  These
are assembly language programs for the LSI-11 which perform the
simple functions of turning on and off the hardware generated break
signals.  The present code for these procedures assume the standard
addresses for REMIN and REMOUT (177520).  If any other address is to
be used, the value for XCSR in both SET_BREAK and CLR_BREAK must be
altered accordingly.


2.  CONTENTS OF THE TOMUSUS FILES

The MUSUS Library version of TOMUSUS.03 consists of the following 
five files:
        
        TOMUS3.A contains instructions for compiling and executing 
        TOMUSUS.03.  (This is what you are reading now.)
        
        TOMUS3.B1 contains the external procedure SET_BREAK and should
        be renamed SET_BREAK.TEXT.
        
        TOMUS3.B2 contains the external procedure CLR_BREAK and should
        be renamed CLR_BREAK.TEXT.

        TOMUS3.B3 contains the unit REMUNIT for TOMUSUS.03 and should
        be renamed REMUNIT.L3.TEXT.  (The "L" in L3 is to remind you
        that this unit was written primarily for LSI-11s.)
        
        TOMUS3.C1 and TOMUS3.C2 together make up the main TOMUSUS.03
        program.  TOMUS3.C1 contains program comments that should be
        inserted at the beginning of the program just after the copyright
        statement.  TOMUS3.C2  contains the main TOMUSUS.03 program.
        It should be renamed TOMUSUS.03.TEXT.

The following instructions for compiling TOMUSUS.03 will assume that 
you have renamed the files as above.


3.  COMPILING

TOMUSUS.03 uses the unit REMUNIT.L3 which in turn uses the external 
procedures SET_BREAK and CLR_BREAK.  Hence, the procedure for 
compiling the entire program must be done in the appropriate sequence 
of steps, as follows.

Step 1:  Assemble SET_BREAK.TEXT and get SET_BREAK.CODE.

Step 2:  Assemble CLR_BREAK.TEXT and get CLR_BREAK.CODE.

Step 3:  Compile REMUNIT.L3.TEXT and get REMUNIT.L3.CODE.

Step 4:  By executing the system program *LIBRARY.CODE, create a new
library (call it anything you want) which will contain the contents of
*SYSTEM.LIBRARY, SET_BREAK.CODE, CLR_BREAK.CODE, and REMUNIT.L3.CODE.

Step 5:  Do a L(ink of the new library. 

Step 6:  Use the linked library as your new *SYSTEM.LIBRARY.

Step 7:  R(un TOMUSUS.03.TEXT and get TOMUSUS.03.CODE as well as a 
test run of the program.


2.  EXECUTING TOMUSUS.03.CODE

Execution of TOMUSUS should be almost self-explanatory, but the 
following comments may be of some help.

     a.  After you do an eXecute on TOMUSUS, it will display a brief
statement on your screen about the TOMUSUS version, date, author's
name, and a copyright statement.  It will then ask you to press
RETURN.  

     b.  After RETURN has been entered, TOMUSUS is ready to
communicate with the remote computer of your choice.  If you had not
already done so, you should connect your modem to the telephone system
at this time and dial the remote computer.  Nothing else needs to be
done as far as TOMUSUS is concerned.

     c.  At anytime during or prior to establishing your remote
connection (but after the initial RETURN), you may temporarily enter
the offline mode of TOMUSUS by pressing the "attention character". 
The default for this is control-E (or control-e).  When the attention
character is pressed, TOMUSUS will temporarily enter an "off-line"
mode and display a menu of certain things you may choose to do at
this point, as follows:

        (1)     Q(uit will terminate the current TOMUSUS session.

        (2)     C(ontinue will cause an immediate exit from the
                offline mode.  (A control-c will also do the same.)

        (3)     B(reak will send the break signal to the remote.
        
        (4)     X(off will send the XOFF character (control-s) to the
                remote.  (Other control characters can be sent directly
                from the keyboard, except for the TOMUSUS attention
                character.)
                
        (5)     O(ptions stands for "miscellaneous options".  It will
                display its own submenu.  Each selection will result in
                a question to the user concerning certain transmission
                characteristics, echoing, or the attention character.
                If you want to change the attention character or
                communicate with a half duplex remote, this is where
                you would change your parameters.  
        
        (6)     L(ogfile will permit you to initiate or terminate
                logging your session to a diskfile.  It will first
                tell you whether a logfile is currently open or not.
                
                If not open, it will ask you if you want to open a 
                logfile.  If you answer with a "Y" or "y", it will 
                ask for a file name.  You should specify a complete 
                diskfile name.  (Remember to use .TEXT if you will
                subsequently use the Editor on this file.)  If you 
                change your mind, a null entry will cancel this operation.
                
                If open, it will ask if you want to close the diskfile.
                
                Opening and closing diskfiles can be done as many times
                as is desired during a session.  Hence, you can write
                different portions of your session to different disk
                files.
                
        (7)     P(rinter is a toggle switch that allows you to open
                or close the line printer at any time during your
                TOMUSUS session.
                
                The current print routine sends characters to the 
                printer as they are typed or received from the remote
                computer.  Hence, if your printer does not allow the
                immediate printing of characters received (or does not
                have the necessary line buffer to collect a line of
                characters before printing), you may run into problems.
                
                
     d.  The offline mode can be entered at any time and as often as
you wish.  In the current implementation of REMUNIT, you can Q(uit out
of TOMUSUS and re-execute TOMUSUS without affecting your remote
communication.  This also means that if necessary you can even do
some offline maneuvers (like examining your disk directory) and then
return to the online mode without affecting your remote connection.


3.  KNOWN BUGS

There is a bug in TOMUSUS.03 that has not been fixed.  This bug is 
encountered when both the L(ogfile and P(rinter options are on.  The 
result is that both the disk file and printer output will$lose some 
characters.  It does not happen when only one of these options is on.

This bug may only affect those who have the same printer configuration 
as mine, which is a TI-810 connected to a Heath H-11 via the Heath 
serial I/O board for the TI-810.  

     
4.  FINAL COMMENTS

Although TOMUSUS bears my copyright statement, it is the result of a 
cooperative effort between myself and the following persons:

        Robert W. Peterson, who was kind enough to allow me to use his 
program TERMINAL and his unit REMUNIT as the starting point for 
TOMUSUS;

        Walter B. Farrell, who made most of the necessary changes to 
Bob Peterson's REMUNIT that allowed the autolog function of TOMUSUS.02 
to work properly; and

        Dr. Richard Yensen, who provided me with the BLOCKWRITE and 
UNITWRITE changes that speeded up the autolog function.


By the way, TOMUSUS was copyrighted primarily to protect Bob 
Peterson's copyright rather than my own code.  If you wish to make 
further changes for your own use, I see no reason why Bob would 
object.  However, if you distribute any modified version of TOMUSUS, I 
think that you should check with Bob and me first.

I would appreciate any and all comments about TOMUSUS, whether you
like it or not.  I am sure that many improvements can be made, and
would like to have any help you could provide to make TOMUSUS a really
useful and enjoyable program.

If you have any problems with TOMUSUS, feel free to send me messages 
on MUSUS or Telemail, or call me at (213)541-2918 any time I'm there
(day or night).


Mike Ikezawa
03 December 1981

